===========================
AMD64 Unix Native Interface
===========================

This is the native interface for AMD64 on Unix-like operating systems.

Memory Layout
=============

The memory layout of the native memory uses the `System V Application Binary
Interface for x86-64 <http://www.x86-64.org/documentation_folder/abi.pdf>`__
(referred to as "the AMD64 ABI" from now on) as a reference. It is recommended
that the Mu memory also use this memory layout, but is not required since the Mu
memory it is never externally visible unless explicitly pinned.

Data in the native memory uses the sizes and alignments of types are listed in
the following table. The unit of sizes and alignments is byte, which is 8 bits.
All non-native-safe types have unspecified sizes and alignments.

.. table:: Mapping between Mu and C types

    =========================== ======================= =============== ================
    Mu type                     C type                  Size            Alignment
    =========================== ======================= =============== ================
    ``int<8>``                  ``char``                1               1
    ``int<16>``                 ``short``               2               2
    ``int<32>``                 ``int``                 4               4
    ``int<64>``                 ``long``, ``long long`` 8               8
    ``float``                   ``float``               4               4
    ``double``                  ``double``              8               8
    ``vector<int<8> 4>``        ``__m128``              16              16
    ``vector<float  4>``        ``__m128``              16              16
    ``vector<double 2>``        ``__m128``              16              16
    ``uptr<T>``                 ``T *``                 8               8
    ``ufuncptr<sig>``           ``T (*) ()``            8               8
    ``ref<T>``                  N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``iref<T>``                 N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``weakref<T>``              N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``tagref64``                N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``funcref<sig>``            N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``threadref``               N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``stackref``                N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``int<1>``                  N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``int<6>``                  N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``int<52>``                 N/A                     unspecified     unspecified
    ``int<n>``                  unspecified             unspecified     unspecified
    ``vector<T n>``             unspecified             unspecified     unspecified
    =========================== ======================= =============== ================

..

    NOTE: Although ``int<1>`` is required and ``int<6>`` and ``int<52>`` are
    required when ``tagref64`` is implemented, their memory layout is
    unspecified because memory access instructions ``LOAD``, ``STORE``, etc. are
    not required to support those types. It it not recommended to include those
    types in the memory because they may never be loaded or stored.

    Although vectors of other lengths are not required by a Mu implementation,
    implementations are encouraged to support them in a way compatible with the
    AMD64 ABI.

The structure type ``struct<...>`` and the hybrid type ``hybrid<F V>`` is
aligned to its most strictly aligned component. Each member is assigned to the
lowest available offset with the appropriate alignment. This rule applies to
hybrids as if the hybrid ``hybrid<F V>`` is a struct of ``F`` followed by an
array of ``V`` of the actual length. Arrays ``array<T>`` use the same alignment
as its elements.

    NOTE: There is no union types in Mu. Arrays do not have special rules of
    16-byte alignment as the AMD64 ABI does. Mu arrays must be declared as an
    array of vectors (such as ``array<vector<int<32> 4> 100>``) to be eligible
    for vector access.

Both integers and floating point numbers are little-endian (lower bytes in lower
addresses). Signed integers use the 2's complement representation. Elements with
lower indexes in a vector is stored in lower addresses in the memory.

Calling Convention
==================

The calling convention between Mu functions is implementation-defined.

The Default Calling Convention
------------------------------

The *default* calling convention, denoted by the ``#DEFAULT`` flag in the IR,
follows the AMD64 ABI in register usage, stack frame structure, parameter
passing and returning. The parameter types and the return types are mapped to C
types according to the above table. As a special case, if the native function
returns void, the corresponding Mu signature returns no values ``(...) -> ()``.
Mu ``struct`` and ``array`` types are mapped to C structs of corresponding
members. ``array`` cannot be the type of parameters or return values because C
disallows this, but arrays within structs and pointers to arrays are is allowed.

Arguments and return values are passed in registers and the memory according to
the AMD64 ABI, with the types of Mu arguments and the return type mapped to the
corresponding C types.

    NOTE: This is to say, C programs can call Mu functions with a "compatible"
    signature (that is, parameters and return values match the above table).
    Even if the signature is not "perfectly" matching (for example, an int/long
    is passed when a pointer is expected, Mu must still interpret the incoming
    arguments strictly according to the ABI, i.e. interpreting the integer value
    in the register as an address).

If a Mu function of signature *sig* is exposed with the *default* calling
convention, the resulting value has ``ufuncptr<sig>`` type, i.e. it is a
function pointer which can be called (by either Mu or native programs) with the
*default* calling convention.

It has undefined behaviour when the native program attempts to unwind Mu frames.

    NOTE: This means C ``longjmp`` and C++ exceptions must not go through Mu
    frames, but as long as they are handled **above** any Mu frames, it is safe.

.. vim: tw=80
