==================
Threads and Stacks
==================

One unique feature of Mu is the flexible relation between stacks and threads. A
thread can swap between multiple stacks to achieve light-weighted context
switch. This provides support for language features like co-routines and green
threads.

On the other hand, Mu does allow multiple simultaneous threads. Mu threads, by
design, can be implemented as native OS threads and make use of parallel CPU
resources. Mu also has a memory model. See the `Memory Model <memory-model.rest>`__
chapter for more information.

This chapter discusses Mu threads and Mu stacks. In this chapter, "thread"
means "Mu thread" unless explicitly stated otherwise.

Concepts
========

A **stack** is the context of nested or recursive activations of functions.

    NOTE: "Stack" here means the "control stack", or more precisely the
    "context" of execution. On a concrete machine, the context includes not only
    the stack, but also the CPU/register states. Mu abstracts the CPU state,
    modelling it as part of the state of the stack-top frame.

A stack has many **frames**, each of which is the context of one function
activation. A frame contains the states of all local variables (parameters and
instructions), the program counter and alloca cells (see `Mu and the Memory
<uvm-memory.rest>`__). Each frame is associated with a *version* of a function.

    NOTE: Because Mu allows function redefinition, a function may be redefined
    by the client, and newly created function activations (newly called
    functions) will use the new definition. But any existing function
    activations will still use their old definitions, thus a frame is only bound
    to a particular version of a function, not just a function. This is very
    important because Mu cannot magically translate the state of any old
    function activation to a new one. A redefined function may even have
    completely different meaning from the old one. Mu allows the client to do
    crazy things like redefining a factorial function to a Fibonacci function.

    During on-stack replacement, the Mu client API can tell the client which
    version of which function any frame is executing and the value of KEEPALIVE
    variables.  The client is responsible for translating the Mu-level states to
    the high-level language states.

A **thread** is the unit of CPU scheduling. A thread can be **bound** to a
stack, in which case the thread executes using the stack as its context.
The phrase "bind a stack to a thread" has the same meaning as "bind a thread to
a stack". While a thread is executing on a stack, it changes the state of the
stack, including changing the value of local variables by executing
instructions, pushing or popping frames and allocating memory on the stack.

A stack can be bound to at most one thread at any moment.

A thread is always bound to one stack, with one exception: when executing a
``TRAP`` or ``WATCHPOINT`` instruction, it is temporarily unbound from its
current stack. It either rebinds to a stack (may be the old stack or another
stack) or terminates after returning from the trap handler.

    TODO: https://github.com/microvm/microvm-meta/issues/42 Extend the unbinding
    to undefined function handling.

State of Threads
================

The state of a thread include:

- the *stack* it is bound to (explained in this chapter)

- a *thread-local object reference* (see below)

- a thread-local *pinning multi-set* (see `object pinning
  <native-interface.rest#pinning>`__)

    NOTE: Implementations may keep more thread-local states, such as the
    thread-local memory pool for the garbage collector. They are implementation
    details.

The **thread-local object reference** is an arbitrary object reference, and can
be ``NULL``. It is initialised when a thread is created. It can be read and
modified by the thread itself. It can also be read and modified by the client in
the trap handler, but the trap handler can only read and modify the thread-local
object reference of the thread that triggered the trap. It cannot be read or
modified in any other ways.

    NOTE: This design ensures that:

    1. The access to the thread-local object reference itself is data-race-free.

    2. It is only a single object reference, so the reference can fit in a
       machine register. In this way, if the implementation reserves a register
       for that reference, accessing fields in the object it refers to can be as
       efficient as register-indexed addressing.

    It also off-loads the responsibility of resizing or redefining the
    thread-local object to the client. If the client wishes to add more fields
    to that object (e.g. when more bundles are loaded), it can use watchpoints
    to stop existing threads and replace their thread-local object references in
    the trap handler.

States of Stacks and Frames
===========================

At any moment, **the state of a frame** is one of the following:

READY<Ts>
    (Ts = T1 T2 T3 ..., a list of types) The frame is ready to resume when
    values of types *T1 T2 T3 ...* are supplied. *Ts* can be an empty list.

ACTIVE
    The current frame is the top of a stack and a thread is executing on the
    stack.

DEAD
    The frame is dead.

**The state of a stack** is the state of its top frame. In a bound stack, the
top frame is in the **ACTIVE** state while all other frames are in the
**READY<Ts>** state; in an unbound stack, all frames are in the **READY<Ts>**
state, where *Ts* are specific to each frame. When killing a stack, all of its
frames enter the **DEAD** state.

Calling, returning and exception throwing instructions change the state of
frames, but since the stack is always running on the same stack, the state of
the stack remains to be **ACTIVE**. ``CALL`` and ``CCALL`` change the state of
the caller frame to **READY<Ts>** where *Ts* is the return type of the callee,
but a new frame is created for the callee, entering the **ACTIVE** state
immediately. ``RET`` and ``THROW`` remove frames from the top of the current
stack, but resume a lower frame and change its state to **ACTIVE**.

Operations on remote stacks can change the state of stacks. The table below
summarises important operations:

======================= =============================== ======================= ======================
Operation               Current Stack                   New/Destination Stack   Affected frames
======================= =============================== ======================= ======================
create new stack        N/A                             READY<Ts>               creates new frame
create new thread       N/A                             READY<Ts> -> ACTIVE     top
SWAPSTACK               ACTIVE -> READY<Ts> or DEAD     READY<Us> -> ACTIVE     both top frames
killing a stack         N/A                             READY<Ts> -> DEAD       all frames
@uvm.thread_exit        ACTIVE -> DEAD                  N/A                     all frames
trap to client          ACTIVE -> READY<Ts>             N/A                     top
popping a frame         READY<Ts> -> READY<Us>          N/A                     removes top frame
pushing a frame         READY<Ts> -> READY<Us>          N/A                     creates new frame
======================= =============================== ======================= ======================

Stack and Thread Creation
=========================

Mu stacks and Mu threads can be created by Mu instructions ``@uvm.new_stack``
and ``NEWTHREAD``, or the API function ``new_stack`` and ``new_thread``.

When a stack is created, a Mu function must be provided. The stack will contain
a frame created for the current version of the function (as seen by the current
thread because of concurrency and the memory model). This frame is called the
**stack-bottom frame** and the function is called the **stack-bottom function**.

    NOTE: The stack-bottom frame is conceptually the last frame in a Mu stack
    and returning from that frame has undefined behaviour. But a concrete Mu
    implementation can still have its own frames or useful data below the
    stack-bottom frame. They are implementation-specific details.

The stack-bottom frame (and also the stack) is in the **READY<Ts>** state, where
Ts are the parameter types of the stack-bottom function. The resumption point is
the beginning of the function version.

When a thread is created, a stack must be provided as its **initial stack**.
Creating a thread binds the thread to the stack, passing values or raising
exception to it (explained later), thus the top frame will enter the **ACTIVE**
state after the thread is created. A newly created thread starts execution
immediately.

    NOTE: Unlike Java, there is not a separate step to "start" a thread. A
    thread starts when it is created.

Thread Termination
==================

A thread is terminated when it executes the ``@uvm.thread_exit`` instruction, or
the client orders the current thread to terminate in a trap handler.

The ``@uvm.thread_exit`` instruction kills the current stack of the current
thread.

Mu may change the value of ``threadref`` type to ``NULL`` if the thread it
refers to is terminated.

Binding of Stack and Thread
===========================

Binding
-------

Some actions, including the ``NEWTHREAD`` and the ``SWAPSTACK`` instruction, the
``new_thread`` API function and the trap handler, can bind a thread to a stack.

When **binding** a thread to a stack, the state of its top frame changes from
**READY<Ts>** to **ACTIVE**. In this process, one of the following two actions
shall be performed on the stack:

- A binding operation can **pass values** of types *Ts* to the stack. In this
  case, the types *Ts* must match the expected types, and the stack **receives
  the values**. *Ts* can be an empty list.

- A binding operation can **raise an exception** to the stack. In this case, the
  stack can be in **READY<Ts>** with any *Ts* and it **receives the exception**.

It gives undefined behaviour if the stack is not in the expected state.

Resumption Point
----------------

A frame in the **READY<Ts>** state has a **resumption point**. The resumption
point determines how the received values and the received exception are
processed when binding to a thread.

For a Mu frame, the resumption point is either the beginning of a function
version, or an OSR point instruction in the function version.

- In the former case, the *Ts* in **READY<Ts>** are the parameters of the
  function (also the entry block). Received values are bound to the parameters
  and the execution continues from the beginning of the entry block. Received
  exception is re-thrown.

- In the latter case, the *Ts* types are determined by the concrete
  instructions. Specifically, *Ts* are the return types for ``CALL`` and
  ``CCALL``, and are explicitly specified for ``TRAP``, ``WATCHPOINT`` and
  ``SWAPSTACK``. The received values are bound to the results of the OSR point
  instruction. The received exception is handle by the instruction or re-thrown
  depending on the instruction.

Undefined Mu functions behaves as defined in `Mu IR <uvm-ir.rest>`__.

Native frames can only enter the **READY<Ts>** state when it calls back to Mu.
Thus the resumption point is where it will continue after the native-to-Mu call
returns. The received values are the return values to the native function.
Throwing exceptions to native frames has implementation-defined behaviour.

Mu gives the client a unified model of stack binding. The binding operation is
only aware of the *Ts* types of the **READY<Ts>** state, but oblivious of the
resumption point. Therefore it can resume any **READY<Ts>** stack in the same
way, whether the resumption point is the beginning of a function, a call site, a
trap or a swap-stack instruction, or a native frame.

    Note to the Mu implementers: swap-stack, Mu-to-Mu calls and Mu-native calls
    may all have different calling conventions, but the implementation must
    present a unified "resumption protocol" to the client: all stack-binding
    operations work on all OSR point instructions, as long as the *Ts* in
    *READY<Ts>* match the passed values. In practice, some "adapter" frames may
    need to be inserted to convert one convention to another, but these frames
    must not be seen by the client. This implies that some API functions
    (especially stack introspection) must "lie" to the client about the presence
    of such frames.

    For example, on x86_64, assume ``SWAPSTACK`` passes values to the other
    stack via rdi and rsi, but ``RET`` returns values to the caller via rax and
    rdx. If, during OSR, a frame pausing on the ``CALL`` instruction becomes the
    top frame of a stack, then the Mu implementation must also create some glue
    code and an adapter frame above that frame, so that when a thread SWAP-STACK
    to this stack, values passed in rdi and rsi can be moved to rax and rdx,
    respectively. This "adapter" frame must also recover callee-saved registers.

Unbinding
---------

Some actions, including the ``@uvm.thread_exit``, ``TRAP``, ``WATCHPOINT`` and
the ``SWAPSTACK`` instruction, can unbind a thread from a stack.

When **unbinding** a thread from a stack, one of the following two actions shall
be performed on the stack:

An unbinding operation can **leave the stack** with a return types *Ts*. In this
case, the state of its top frame changes from **ACTIVE** to **READY<Ts>** for
some given *Ts*. The instruction becomes the resumption point of the frame.

An unbinding operation can **kill the stack**. In this case, the state of all
frames of the stack changes from **ACTIVE** to **DEAD**. Specifically the
``@uvm.thread_exit`` kills the current stack and the ``SWAPSTACK`` instruction
can do either option on the swapper.

Executing a ``TRAP`` or an enabled ``WATCHPOINT`` instruction implies an
unbinding operation, leaving the top frame in a **READY<Ts>** state.

Swap-stack
----------

**Swap-stack** is an operation that unbinds a thread from a stack and rebind
that thread to a new stack. In a swap-stack operation, the stack to unbind from
is called the **swapper** and the stack to bind to is called the **swappee**.

The ``SWAPSTACK`` instruction (see `<instruction-set.rest>`__) performs a
*swap-stack* operation.

A trap handler can do similar things as *swap-stack* by re-binding the current
thread to a different stack.

Stack Destruction
=================

The ``@uvm.kill_stack`` instruction, the ``kill_stack`` API function and all
operations that perform unbinding operations can destroy a stack. Destroying a
stack changes the state of all of its frames to **DEAD**.

If a stack becomes unreachable from roots, the garbage collector may kill the
stack.

The Mu may change the value of ``stackref`` type to ``NULL`` if the stack it
refers to is in the **DEAD** state.

Stack Introspection
===================

Stacks in the **READY<Ts>** state can be introspected. Stacks in other states
cannot.

The stack introspection API uses **frame cursors**. A *frame cursor* is a
mutable opaque structure allocated by Mu. It refers to a Mu frame, and also
keeps implementation-dependent states necessary to iterate through frames in a
stack.

    Note: The reason why it is mutable is that the cursor may be big. The states
    to be kept is specific to the implementation. Generally speaking, the more
    callee-saved registers there are, the bigger the cursor is. Allocating a new
    structure whenever moving down a frame may not scale for deep stacks.

The ``new_cursor`` API call allocates a frame cursor that refers to the top
frame of a given stack, and returns a ``framecursorref`` that refers to the
cursor. Then the client can use the ``next_frame`` API to move the cursor to the
frame below. The ``copy_cursor`` copies the given frame cursor. The original
frame cursor and the copied cursor can move down independently. This is useful
when the client wishes to iterate through the stack in different paces. The
``close_cursor`` API closes the frame cursor and deallocates its resources.

It has undefined behaviour if a stack is bound to a thread or a stack is killed
while there are frame cursors to its frames not closed. It has undefined
behaviour if ``next_frame`` goes below the bottom frame.

    Note: There are several reasons why it needs explicit closing.

    * It forces the client to avoid racing stack modification and stack
      introspection.
    
    * It will not force the Mu implementation to use a particular way to
      allocate such cursors. The Mu implementation can use malloc and free. If
      the implementation uses garbage collection for such cursors, it can still
      treat the ``close_cursor`` operation as a no-op.

    * An alternative is to close all related cursors automatically when the
      stack is re-bound. But that will involve one extra check for every
      swap-stack operation, which may be much more frequent than stack
      introspection, which is usually only used in exceptional cases.

The ``cur_func``, ``cur_func_ver``, ``cur_inst`` and ``dump_keepalives`` API
calls take a ``framecursorref`` as argument, and returns the ID of the function,
function version or current instruction of the frame, or dumps the keep-alive
variables of the current instruction of the frame.

Multiple threads may introspect the stack concurrently as long as there is no
concurrent modification using the on-stack replacement API (see below). However,
it has undefined behaviour to operate on a closed frame cursor.

These operations can also be performed by their equivalent common instructions
``@uvm.meta.*``.

On-stack Replacement
====================

The client can pop and push frames from or to a stack.

The ``pop_frames_to`` API function takes a ``framecursorref`` as argument. It
will pop all frames above the frame cursor, and the frame of the cursor becomes
the new top frame.

Popping native frames has implementation-defined behaviour. It has undefined
behaviour if a frame is popped but there are frame cursors referring to that
frame.

The ``push_frame`` API function takes a ``stackref`` and a ``funcref`` as
arguments. It creates a new frame on the top of the stack, using the current
version (as seen by the current thread) of the given function. The resumption
point is the beginning of the function version. The return types of the function
must match the *Ts* of the state of the previous frame, which must be
**READY<Ts>**.

There are equivalent common instructions in the IR, too.

It has undefined behaviour if

- there are two API calls or equivalent instructions executed by two threads,
  and
- one is ``new_cursor``, ``next_frame``, ``cur_func``, ``cur_func_ver``,
  ``cur_inst``, ``dump_keepalives``, ``pop_frames_to`` or ``push_frame``, and
- the other is ``pop_frames_to`` or ``push_frame``, and
- neither happens before the other.

After popping or pushing frames, the state of the stack become the state of the
new top frame, which must be **READY<Ts>** for some *Ts*. The stack can be
bound.

    NOTE: For the ease of Mu implementation, the new function must continue
    from the beginning rather than an arbitrary instruction in the middle.
    Continuing from the middle of a function demands too much power from the
    code generator.
    
    However, in most OSR scenarios, the desired behaviour is to continue from
    the point where the program left out for optimisation. The client can
    emulate the behaviour of continuing from the middle of a function by
    inserting a "prologue" in the high-level language in the beginning of the
    function. For example, in C, the client can add extra assignment expressions
    to initialise local variables to the previous context and use a goto
    statement to jump to the location to continue. Then the optimising compiler
    can remove unreachable code. As another example, if the client implements a
    JVM, it can insert ``Xstore`` instructions and a ``goto`` instruction to
    continue from the appropriate bytecode instruction. The optimising compiler
    can handle the rest.

    TODO: With the goto-with-values form defined, we can extend the IR and the
    API so that execution can continue from an arbitrary basic block of an
    arbitrary function version, rather than just the beginning of a function.

Futex
=====

Mu provides a mechanism similar to the Futex in the Linux kernel for
implementing blocking locks and other synchronisation primitives.

There is a waiting queue for all memory locations that has some integer types.
(See `<portability.rest>`__ for valid candidate types for Futex.)

The ``@uvm.futex.wait`` and the ``@uvm.futex.wait_timeout`` instructions put the
current thread into the waiting queue of a memory location. Both
``@uvm.futex.wake`` and ``@uvm.futex.cmp_requeue`` wakes up threads in a waiting
queue of a memory location.

    NOTE: The term *memory location* is defined in Mu's sense and is abstract
    over physical memory or the virtual memory space given by the operating
    system. Even if a Mu implementation uses copying or replicating garbage
    collectors, the memory location in a heap object remains the same until the
    object is collected.

    The Mu Futex is designed to be easy to map to the ``futex`` system call on
    Linux. With the presence of copying garbage collector, Mu may internally
    perform ``FUTEX_REQUEUE`` or ``FUTEX_CMP_REQUEUE`` operations to compensate
    the effect of object movements. It may put barriers around Futex-related Mu
    instructions when the GC is concurrently re-queuing threads.

When a thread is blocking on a futex, the state of its stack is still ACTIVE,
making the impression that the thread is still "busy executing" the futex
wait/wait_timeout instructions. Only the kernel knows whether it is doing an
OS-level swap-stack, as it always does for context-switching.

.. vim: tw=80
